Good afternoon.
My name is Mark Piccirelli.
I'm an engineer in the
Cocoa Frameworks group.
Tiger is going to include a lot
of new Cocoa Scripting features,
and the focus of all these is to
make it as easy as possible for you
to implement great scriptability.
The prerequisites for this talk:
If you've already done a lot
of basic Cocoa programming,
you'll find out how to add scriptability
to your existing applications.
If you've been working with
Cocoa Scripting already,
you'll find out what's new in Tiger.
There's a bunch.
And if so far you've been
programming in Carbon land,
but you know a bunch about scriptability,
this will be a good opportunity
for you to get a sort of a
feel for how Cocoa differs.
Today I'll be specifically talking
about the new SDF file format
that Cocoa supports for you
to declare your scriptability.
I'll go into a good bit of detail about
how scripting uses key-value coding,
a fundamental mechanism and
foundation that's being reused
for a lot of things now in Cocoa.
I'll talk about error handling
because it's so important.
I'll go into some detail
about scriptability in apps
that use Cocoa bindings,
and I'll leave you with
some debugging hints.
So today's sample app.
If you're on the Cocoa Dev mailing list,
you know that Scott Anguish and
Malcolm Crawford have been doing
a tremendous job of answering
questions about Cocoa bindings.
And Malcolm has actually gone
through the trouble of creating a
pretty nice little sample of how to
hook up a custom view to bindings.
So as a casting about for
what should I make scriptable,
this seemed like a pretty obvious choice,
because one of the things I want
to show you is how well bindings
and scripting interact now.
The first thing you do when you add
scriptability to an application is that
you have to declare the scriptability so
that applications like Script Editor that
will drive the scripting can
get the scripting dictionary,
can show it to the user,
can compile scripts and things like that.
And in Tiger,
we're adding a new mechanism to do that,
a new file format actually
called the SDEF file format.
So what is there to declare for
an application's scriptability?
Well, as you can see in the screenshot,
which is from Script Editor,
there's scriptable classes and
there's scriptable commands.
This is the scripting dictionary
for the graphics bindings
that I'll be showing you.
And it has a document class.
It's very simple.
It just has circles,
the circles you saw on the screen there.
And there is a circle class also with a
variety of properties associated with it,
like the position and the
color and the radius of the
circle and some shadow aspects.
So there are three main categories of
things you declare in Scriptability:
the classes that the scripter sees,
the commands that the scripter, you know,
the person who's writing the script,
can use,
and then types that are used by class
properties and command parameters.
And we have a pretty big
variety of types available now.
It expanded a lot actually in Tiger,
but just some of the more
common ones you'll be using
are enumerations and records,
which are new,
and support for some custom types too.
So the old way, in Panther and earlier,
for declaring your
application scriptability,
it was done by providing a pair
of files in your application,
a script suite file and a
script terminology file.
The script suite file was full
of implementation details,
and the script terminology
file was full of human-readable
strings to show to the user.
These always lived in your
application's resources directory,
and they're kind of hard to work with,
mostly because they're split
across two different files that
you always had to keep in sync.
It was a feature, it had something to do
with internationalization,
it's not really being used that much,
and actually there are other
mechanisms in Cocoa for
getting roughly the same thing.
But when I say that it
was hard to work with,
don't let me talk you out of
trying scriptability right now.
They're not that hard to work with.
You don't have to wait for Tiger to
get a good head start on adding
scriptability to your application.
And also,
some of the things we're doing while
adding support for this new system.
The new scripting declaration
file format are kind of carrying
over into the script suite world.
So, you know,
warnings about things that you
do wrong and stuff like that are
also being applied to the old
file formats just serendipitously.
So working with them is also getting
easier while we're doing this.
And of course, if you add scriptability
to your application now,
because it's such a valuable feature,
you know, users want to do workflow,
things like that.
You know, of course,
we won't break compatibility
for your application in Tiger,
even though we are doing
some pretty big work.
So, you know, we're working with them.
changes.
So that was the old way of doing it.
I won't go into too
much detail about that.
I actually went into quite a bit of
detail about it like two years ago.
The new way,
which I will discuss in detail,
is SDEF files.
The SDEF file format itself is not new.
It was introduced way back in Mac OS 10.2
in the form of some documentation
and a command line tool called SDP.
That was pretty handy.
You could start with an SDEF file,
and it would parse that and
output Carbon AETE resources,
as well as Cocoa Script Suite and
Script Terms.
So even though Cocoa didn't
have built-in support for this
more convenient file format,
more powerful file format,
it was still useful for you
to build your scriptability.
I think some applications at Apple,
like Mail, for instance,
actually write all their
scriptability support in SDEF,
and then they use SDP during
a build phase to output the
Script Suite and Script Terminology
files that Cocoa needs at runtime.
But that won't be necessary anymore.
What's new in Cocoa is that it
parses these SDef files natively.
They still in general
will probably live in your
application's resources directory.
But Cocoa is not going to just
load them automatically every
SDef in your resources directory
like it did with ScriptSuite and
Script Terminology files because that
was pretty inconvenient in the past.
ScriptSuite declarations would
get loaded into every application
whether they were applicable or not.
And it wasn't exactly the
perfect way to do things.
So now what we're going to let you do is
you specifically specify in an entry in
your application's Info.plist what the
top level scripting definition file is.
In our example it's going to
be graphics bindings.sdef.
One thing that hasn't changed is
that you still need an entry in your
Info.plist NSAppleScript enabled
equals yes to turn on
scripting in the first place.
So the SDF file format is XML-based.
Nonetheless,
it is easier to edit than the
old script-sweetened script
terminology formats were.
A lot of that ease comes from the
fact that it's just one file now.
Programmatic information and
human-readable information
are all in the same file.
It lends itself well to attractive,
informative scripting dictionaries.
It was really designed to represent
easily the things that users need to
see to be able to write scripts easily.
If you want to get every last bit
of detail about this file format,
just go to Terminal and type man sdef.
There's a pretty large manual page
that declares everything in big detail.
So the first category of things
that you declare in SDEF files
are class declarations.
And you're declaring your
application scripting classes,
which very often have a
very tight coupling with
your implementation classes,
you know, the ones that came about just
as a result of your design,
your object model.
But not always.
Sometimes there are places where you'll
have classes that are just for scripting.
When you declare classes,
you typically declare the scriptable
properties of those classes.
And something that's a little rarer,
you declare the commands that
instances of those classes can handle.
And I say it's rare because
the AppleScript standard suite
includes a pretty complete
set of fundamental operations,
and customizing that is
very often not necessary.
A scripting class declaration has a
human readable name and description,
a four-character code that identifies it,
and if you're hoping that I'd be saying,
"There are no more four-character
codes," for people who've
worked with this in the past,
I won't be.
They're still there,
but we know that people
hate to work with them.
So we may make some progress
in that in the future.
So it also has implementation
details like the name of the
objective C or Java class,
and property declarations and
just a terminology mismatch
for historical reasons.
What we call properties in
AppleScript are usually called
attributes in 200 relationships
by Cocoa programmers,
and element class declarations in
AppleScript are usually called too many
relationships by Cocoa programmers.
So here's zooming in on the circle
of the document and the circle
class of that graphics binding app.
So you can see the document
class has just one element class,
circle.
So the elements of one of
these documents are circles.
And there is a circle class with
the properties I mentioned earlier.
Here's what you do to make
that sort of thing appear in
your scripting dictionary.
This is part of the declaration,
this is most of the declaration
for the Circle class.
It has a name and a human-readable
description and a four-character code.
When I talk about four-character codes,
by the way, I'll be pointing you later
to some documentation,
the new scripting interface guidelines
that give advice about how to pick those.
Implementation details
like the Cocoa class.
We have an Objective-C class
in our project,
also called Circle.
Whenever in an SDEF file you
see a Cocoa element with an
attribute like class after it,
that's always an implementation detail.
These SDEF files are made to be read
by a number of different clients,
like Script Editor will be reading them,
as well as Cocoa reading
them for its own purposes.
So all the implementation details
are kept separate that way.
Properties also have names and
descriptions and four-character codes,
but they also have something else.
They have a type.
So in our simple example here,
the types of the X position
and the Y positions are reals,
you know, floats.
And the type for the color
is a color that's built into
our system called color.
An implementation detail that
you get to provide when you're
declaring that a class has properties
is the key for the property.
And I'm going to be talking
about key-value coding and
key-value observing a lot today.
These keys are the strings that
identify the properties for use by
these fundamental systems in Foundation.
Cocoa command declarations,
which I won't go into in too much
detail because declaring custom
commands is hopefully very rare,
look very similar in SDEF,
same sort of shape.
Cocoa already includes declarations
of the commands in the standard suite,
get, set, move, duplicate, open, print,
close, quit, save, things like that.
A new feature in SDEF,
something that people
have been asking for,
is the ability to, in rare situations,
replace our command declarations
with customized ones that
have more parameters,
things like that.
So you're going to be able to do that now
with this new file format we've adopted.
And you can, as always,
add your own custom commands.
So a command declaration has
human readable name description,
two four character codes
instead of just one,
and then an implementation detail
like the name of the objective C or
Java class that encapsulate instances
of those commands that come over
as a result of running the script.
And commands have direct parameters and
they also have other kinds of parameters.
These are mentioned pretty much in the
Apple script language guide but we do
let you declare them with great fidelity
so you're able to do things that match
exactly what people who've read the
Apple script language guide would expect.
And if a command has a return code you
get to declare the type of that too.
Just a quick example,
the send command from mails scriptability
declared as a nestf is very simple.
It has a name and description,
a pair of four character codes,
and this one has a direct parameter that
represents the receiver of the command.
In this case the type of the receiver.
The receiver will be a message.
Message is another class that's also
declared in mails scriptability.
So basic types that you get to use.
The set is pretty clean.
The names that you use in the SDEF are
pretty much the human-readable
names that users see in scripting
dictionaries when they're opening it up
in Script Editor or something like that.
So we provide the set
that people are expecting,
things like Boolean, color, date, file,
integer, real, so on.
Each of these maps to a Cocoa class
so that your scriptability code will
get an instance of the Cocoa class
whenever one of those fundamental
types appears in the script.
So Booleans map to NSNumbers,
integers also map to NSNumbers,
colors map to NS colors, and so on.
Another type that you'll see
in S-DEF is the specifier type.
It corresponds to an
AppleScript reference,
what's called an AppleScript language
guide or reference.
And in Cocoa,
the class that represents this
is NSScriptObjectSpecifier.
And a specifier identifies one
or more scriptable objects,
like words four through eight of text,
of a text-edit document,
or something like that.
And here's an example use of that.
Just the close command has a direct
parameter that represents the
receivers of the close command,
and the type is specifier,
which means that you send a close command
to a set of objects that are specified,
like, for example, you know,
documents one through three
or something like that.
Another type that you'll see in
SDEF is a location specifier,
which is a lot like a specifier,
but not quite.
It corresponds to an AppleScript language
guide insertion point,
and in Cocoa,
the class that's used to represent
this is NSPositionalSpecifier.
And it identifies an object location,
which will very often be the same
as the location of an actual object.
Sometimes it'll be the position
before or after a specified object.
Here's an example use.
The standard suites move
command has a to parameter.
It's very popular to name
parameters with prepositions.
In this case,
this very fundamental command,
the to parameter,
its type is location specifier.
You're specifying the location
to which things should be moved.
Some more types that
you get to use in SDEF.
Another one is enumerations.
If you've been programming in C,
this is very old news.
It's the same concept in Apple Script.
They're named values.
Here's an example.
It's the declaration for the
printing error handling enumeration,
which is used by the new
enhanced print Apple event,
about which a tech note appeared
on our web about a year ago.
So when you send a print
command to an application that
supports everything properly,
you get to specify what kind of
post-script error handling gets done,
detailed or standard.
And that's specified
just with an enumeration,
so scripters don't have to type
in integers or things like that.
of ancient AppleScript concept
is the list type,
but Cocoa hasn't really
supported it properly until now.
In Tiger, it will.
You can preface just about
any type name with list of,
and that indicates that it should
be one or more of those things.
Your implementation in this
case will always be passed,
in this example, for list of file,
an NSArray of NSURLs.
So even when the script specifies,
for example, just one file,
we want to make it very easy for
your implementation code not to
have to check multiple types.
You know, is it a bare NSURL?
Is it an NSArray of URLs?
If you declared list of file,
you'll always get an NSArray of NSURLs.
A new feature in SDEF that
we think will turn out to be
pretty useful is complex types.
And I don't mean it has a
real and imaginary part.
I mean that the types is one of
a variety of different types,
alternative types.
So this will be useful in situations
like specifying the address book
label in address book scripting for
a phone number or an email message.
You can say home or work
or something like that.
You can just do this with
a string if you want,
but there's a little bit more
checking that can go on at compile
time if you support either a string
for custom labels or one of an
enumeration for predefined labels.
And this not only lets scripters
write what they want to write,
it lets them know that they can write it
because information about this actually
appears in the scripting dictionary.
So scripting dictionary is an SDEF.
A lot of the things that we're
going to be talking about in
SDEF are going to be much richer,
filled with a lot more hints to scripters
about what they can actually do,
what's worth trying.
And here's a sample from the
standard enhanced print Apple event.
The type of the direct parameter,
the receiver of this command,
is list of file or specifier,
which means you can either print a
list of files or one file that is
being picked with the standard file
chooser dialog or something like that,
or a specifier, for example,
a list of documents
that are already open.
You can print those too.
So something that SDEF has that the
older mechanisms didn't have is a way
to take real control over the reuse
of Cocoa's standard declarations.
As I mentioned,
Cocoa doesn't automatically just
read all its own files anymore.
It makes you import them,
so you'll have much better control.
This is done with an import tag,
and here's a sample of
what it'll look like.
Import name equals foundation
standard commands dot SDEF.
We'll be bundling up all of our standard
command declarations in an SDEF,
and you can import them if you
want to save space in your own
SDEF and also to take advantage of
when we add new standard commands,
should that ever happen.
Or if you're doing heavy customization,
you can just copy and paste that all
into your own SDEF and make sure that you
have complete control over what goes on.
Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
Something else that
Cocoa has been lacking,
but we now have because
we've adopted SSTEP,
is called the class extension tag.
And if you've been working
with Objective-C and you
know all about categories,
it's pretty much the same thing.
So actually you can do a few other
things that you wouldn't expect
to be able to do with categories.
So we're putting this
here for one reason.
It's going to make putting
scriptability in bundles easier.
So if you have a bundle or a
plug-in that adds properties to
the top-level application class,
this is how you'll do it.
You'll extend the application class.
In the past,
people have had to do strange things
like subclassing the application class,
even when there wasn't really
much reason to do that,
except we didn't provide a better way.
So now we are providing a better way.
Other features.
If you've been working with
Cocoa Scripting and you've seen the
scripting dictionaries that result where
things are a little bit randomized,
that's because the script suite
format is property list based,
and what's more is using
property list dictionaries,
which of course have no inherent order.
So things get moved around a little bit,
and you can't really control how
things are presented to the user,
the writer of the scripts.
SDEF has no such problem.
A big feature of SDEF is that it's
because it's going to be a file format
that's shared outside of just Cocoa.
There's actually API in the
OSA framework for reading these.
They're going to be recognized
natively by Script Editor,
and presumably, hopefully,
other scripting tools too.
A big feature of SDEF is that it's
going to be a file format that's
shared outside of just Cocoa.
There's actually API in the
OSA framework for reading these.
They're going to be recognized
natively by Script Editor,
and presumably,
other scripting tools too.
So yes,
very old news in the Carbon world,
and Cocoa is finally
catching up in this regard.
So yeah, there won't be any more
application launching.
Script Editor will just dig
around in the info P list and,
you know, we'll be able to, you know,
follow the imports and things like that.
One caveat with that, by the way,
is that if you're doing
the dynamic SDEF feature,
well, just as in, you know,
old Carbon tradition, well,
then your application will still
have to be launched so that you
can actually build it right then.
Other features,
SDEF includes help for letting you
provide backwards script compatibility.
When you're rearranging your scripting,
and it seems that nobody ever
gets it right on the first try,
you want to remove things,
you want to rename things,
but you don't want to break people's
existing scripts gratuitously.
That's kind of rude.
So SDEF has a couple
features like the hidden tag,
which means if you have an element class
or a command or something like that that
you're deprecating because it's not,
you know,
you don't want it around anymore,
it's just cruft, you know,
you can leave that in there so
that existing scripts keep running,
but new users who open up your scripting
dictionary and look at it won't
ever know that those ever existed.
They're hidden.
And the synonym tag fixes similar
problems when you're renaming things or,
you know,
getting the four character codes
just right or something like that.
One thing that's been a source
of big confusion in Cocoa is how
we handle the scripting of files.
And with SDef,
we're really going to be cleaning it up.
There is a single type,
it's a public type, it's called file,
and it's public unlike the old
NSString file path that some of you
are using in your ScriptSuite files.
This one is genuinely public.
And of course, you can use list of file,
and when you do, your code will always
get an NSArray of URLs.
And scripters, you know,
through the magic of
Apple event coercions,
get to use files, aliases, HFS paths,
POSIX paths,
whatever they're most comfortable with,
and your code will never be
able to tell the difference.
It always just gets URLs.
So implementing your
application scriptability.
You've declared it to the outside world,
and now you actually want to
hook it up and make it work.
And this requires you to know
all about key-value coding.
And this isn't a change in Tiger.
Cocoa Scripting has always been
built on top of key-value coding.
And what that means is you have
to make your scriptable classes
key-value coding compliant.
And just to do the same
old terminology review,
properties are attributes and element
classes are too many relationships.
What does key value coding do?
Well first of all it's worth mentioning
that it's the same mechanism that
Cocoa Bindings and now Core Data uses.
It gives access to object
properties using a very generic
API that identifies them by key.
And keys in this case are just strings.
Like in today's example of the
Graphics Bindings application,
the circles of a Graphics Binding
document or the color or the
radius of one of those circles.
So the same keys that appear in
SDEF files and are actually also
used in IB's Bindings Inspector are
used throughout this API.
So to be KVC compliant, the short,
terse answer is you have to implement
enough methods or whatever to make
these two methods in NSObject work,
value for key and set value for key.
So the quick and easy way to do
that is for each one of the keys,
implement a method that has
the exact same name as the key,
so that when Cocoa Scripting
calls or invokes value for key,
value for key is smart enough to root
around in your class's method list and
find that key method and invoke it.
If the property is mutable,
is read-write,
then you also implement a set-key method.
and these are just as simple
looking as they sound.
For our radius property,
where the KVC key is radius,
there's a method named radius and
there's a method named setRadius.
For each too-many relationship,
for each collection of pointers to
other objects that your scriptable has,
you have a choice of
how you implement that.
Typically, you would, again,
implement a method named key
that would return an NSArray,
a collection of the related objects.
But sometimes for implementation reasons,
complexities arise,
and you don't have the pointers to the
other objects stored in an NSArray.
If that's the case,
then instead of implementing key,
just implement count of key
and object in key at index.
And again, key is replaced by the actual
key that we're talking about.
And key-value coding is smart
enough that it'll find those methods
and use them when it needs to.
So how do you decide
between the two of them?
Just whichever is easiest to
implement is the general rule.
If you change your mind later,
perhaps as a result of measuring
and doing performance analysis,
it really makes no difference.
There's nothing outside of key-value
coding that's really going to see this,
unless, of course,
you declare these methods in a
header and show them to other
programmers on your project.
For each mutable-to-many relationship,
where objects can be inserted
or removed via scripting,
via Cocoa bindings, via core data,
you would also implement insert
and remove methods whose names
follow the patterns you see here.
So a quick sample.
The Graphics Binding
Applications Document Class has
a circles relationship.
All the accessors that key-value
coding needs are right here.
So circles returns a pointer,
returns an IVAR,
insert object in circles at index,
remove object from circles at index,
just invoke the regular
NSMutable array methods.
So that was just the tip of
the iceberg as far as what
key-value coding lets you do.
You know,
having you write accessor methods
is the simple way to introduce
it and is what people are most
comfortable with right off the bat.
Key-value coding has a couple other
different ways to grub in your objects.
It even has direct IVAR access.
So you don't even have to write
any accessor methods at all.
You just have to give your
IVAR the same name as the key.
And key-value coding's value
for key and set value for key
methods will poke at it directly.
This is kind of nice because, of course,
it's less code.
And it's also kind of nice because
if you do have to add code,
you actually have to do something
when somebody sets the value.
You have to, you know,
make something else consistent
or something like that.
You can add the set accessor method,
and key-value coding will
simply start using it.
It'll stop grubbing at the IVAR directly
and use your set accessor method.
So we have different lines.
We have different layers of
functionality for you to use,
depending on how much
customization you need to do,
how much code you're willing to write.
You know,
it goes all the way from virtually
no code to not that much code.
So see the documentation where this
is all now described in great detail.
For even greater detail,
see the turgid pros in the
nskeyvaluecoding.h header file,
which explains the default
implementations of methods like value,
set value for key and set value for
key in just excruciating detail.
So great error handling is
worth singling out because it's
something that Cocoa Scripting
hasn't done so well in the past
and it is tremendously important.
Error handling is important because
it helps scripters learn the language.
They learn by doing.
It's a scripting language.
They learn by experimenting,
making mistakes.
They need feedback about
what their mistake was.
And as a nice side benefit,
when you're testing your scriptability,
good error handling helps you debug, too.
We've made big improvements
to our error handling.
If you've ever scripted a
Cocoa app and gotten it wrong,
or worked with things like
Apple Script Studio and gotten it wrong,
you've seen these incredibly
unfriendly error messages.
Like, "NS cannot create command script
error." And tiger messages like those
will be just completely disappearing.
We're just going to do...
We're just going to be doing the
normal Apple event error messages that
we should have been doing all along.
So let me show you what I mean.
So this is the graphics binding project
that I was just telling you about.
Let me just point you at
the S stuff real quick.
Here are some import directives.
In the shipping version of Tiger,
these will actually be a little
more complicated because it will
actually point to things in Cocoa.
But right now,
I just copied these standard SDEFs into
the project to demonstrate it here.
So, some imports of the standard
types and items and commands and
classes that are built into Cocoa.
Here's that circle class
I was telling you about.
Very simple.
Implementation details are
tagged with the Cocoa element.
And this is interesting.
Down here,
you see these have no Cocoa key,
and it's because there's
a default value for those.
In this case, it's just color or
radius or shadow angle.
So, it tries to save you a
little bit of typing,
but if you want to be explicit,
that's okay, too.
So, let's go ahead and start.
So the class, the actual source code,
is pretty simple.
Here is the accessors
for the radius methods.
And really, these aren't even
actually necessary either.
But if you get,
things get a little complicated
and you do have to start
writing accessor methods,
this is what they'll look like.
Let's launch Graphics Binance.
I can show it to you.
Here it is.
- It's pretty neat.
It's like super dot view
or something like that.
So you can do things like
select different dots.
And this is all done with
Cocoa bindings with very little code.
There's a good bit of
code in the actual view,
the graphics view that
you're seeing here,
but that's meant to be highly reusable.
The rest of it is nearly nothing.
So you can move things around.
You can select a bunch of them.
There's this neat little joystick
control for moving the shadows around.
Of course,
the controls take effect on the
entire selection at the time.
So to script that a little bit,
let's open an even simpler document.
does not actually work quite yet.
So,
and plus this is already compiled anyway.
But as standard Apple script, you know,
you get to do things
like setting the radius.
Apple event coercions and
things like that work,
so you get to set the radius
to an actual text string.
And if you set it to something
that's complete nonsense,
finally, it actually says so.
Hopefully you can all read that.
It says, "Cannot make gobbledygook into
type real," which is what it
should have said all along.
and I will be doing more
than just type errors,
checking for indexes
and things like that.
Graphics binding cannot get an error,
can't get document 7, invalid index,
because there's only one of them open.
That's it.
It's not supposed to be
anything earth-shattering,
so it just works now.
So the kind of things that Cocoa is
going to be able to check for you are
when the script uses the wrong types,
nonsense object specifiers you know
document four of word eight might not
really be what they intended to type
we're going to catch stuff like that.
Things like out of
range index specifiers,
we're going to be able to catch
pretty much everything except
invalid property values pretty much.
So when you want to clamp the values
of numbers or something like that
Cocoa can't catch that for you.
Everything else it will.
What you're going to be doing and
this is not implemented in the
seed right here is use the standard
key value coding compliant or the
standard key value coding mechanism.
There's a method on NSObject called
validate value for key error and what
you'll be doing is just implementing
a method whose name is validate
key error to return an error.
So validate radius colon error colon.
So and what's really great about this is
it's tremendous code reuse because the
exact mechanism that Cocoa bindings uses.
In more complicated situations,
if you end up implementing
your own custom commands,
you should know about these methods.
I think these are all added in Panther,
actually.
NSScriptCommand, CurrentCommand,
they weren't all added.
CurrentCommand was added.
We'll get you the script command
that's being executed right now.
So if your accessor method is being
called and you want to set an error
number in it or something like that,
this is how you find out, number one,
whether or not your code is being
called because of scripting.
It's all meant to be highly reusable.
It might be being called because
of Cocoa bindings or core data.
But if it's being called
because of scripting,
there will be a current command.
And one of the things you can
do if something goes wrong is
to send that current command,
set scripting, and then call it.
Script error number.
Now, you shouldn't just pick a number
out of the ether before you,
or you may end up having to.
But before you do that,
have a look at the AppleScript language
guide where a bunch of error codes
that people who write scripts are
expecting to see are documented.
And they're all declared
as constants in CarbonCore,
MacTypes.h, which you typically import
with the umbrella header,
so Coreservices.h.
There's another method on NSScriptCommand
called setScriptErrorString.
Don't use this gratuitously like we were.
That's how we ended up with things
like NSCannotCreateCommandScriptError.
If you're using one of the numbers
that AppleScript recognizes,
and it recognizes a bunch,
don't set any error string.
Just set the number,
and AppleScript will pick
the right string for you.
And when talking about error handling,
it is worth focusing on the
specific brand of error handling,
type checking.
Because in addition to all the
other things where you want
to help scripters experiment,
there's a big reliability issue
here that you might not have
realized while implementing your own
scriptability if you've been doing so.
Is that it's possible for scripters
to crash your app by arranging
for objects of just the wrong
type to be passed to your code.
So we're going to be closing that up
because SDEF has very good support
for declaring exactly the types
that your implementation can handle.
Cocoa is going to make sure that your
implementation is only passed objects
of the exact right type to you.
And as a result of the
good type declaration,
the user is going to get good hints
about what their scripts can do.
So sometimes in programming systems,
when there's a lot of type checking,
that can impinge flexibility.
But in this case, we don't think it will.
We think there'll be
more flexibility now,
because Apple Events, upon which all this
scripting stuff is built,
has always had a pretty good
Apple Event coercion scheme for
coercing things of one type to another.
And when Cocoa has good type information,
it uses that properly.
So the user will be able to do
things that are close enough,
typing in text,
typing in a number in textual
form instead of actually
getting the number right.
Scriptability and Cocoa Bindings.
Cocoa Bindings,
as hopefully you all know by now,
is a big new technology that
was introduced last year at
WWDC for creating user interfaces
with not a lot of glue code.
We are making improvements to how nicely
scriptability interacts with that.
So,
both scriptability and Cocoa Bindings,
and now Core Data too,
use key-value coding very heavily.
So, when you make your classes
key-value coding compliant,
you're killing two or
three birds with one stone.
We also introduced last year something
that goes on top of key-value
coding called key-value observing.
Now, scriptability is not interested
in key-value observing.
There's no way to write a script that
observes objects in another application,
though that would be very interesting.
It just depends on key-value coding.
But those same classes are very often
implemented or are very often reused
between scriptability and bindings.
So for bindings, you have to be key-value
observing compliant.
And we've made some improvements
to how scripting uses KVC to
make that easier for you.
So Cocoa Scripting now
uses setValueForKey,
which is a new method that
was introduced last year.
This makes it easier for you to use
the automatic KVO notification feature.
The old takeValueForKey method,
which Scripting was using,
is now deprecated.
If you have existing code and you're
overriding it for some reason,
we'll still invoke it in that
case because we don't want
to break your application,
but we encourage you to move
to the newer method because
it works properly with KVO.
Something else that was added to
key-value coding as part of the
Cocoa Bindings feature is a new method
called mutable array value for key.
When I was talking about those insert
and remove methods that you have to
implement on your too-many-relationships,
this is the method that has
the smarts to go find those.
Again, it takes advantage of this
automatic KVO notification feature,
where key-value observers are
notified merely because a set
accessor or an insertion method
or a remove method is invoked.
And just as in the simpler case,
old methods like insert value
index and property with key
will continue to be invoked in
Tiger for the foreseeable future
for backwards compatibility reasons.
So automatic KVO means,
because you have to be key-value
coding compliant anyway for all your
properties that you're making scriptable,
means that you're probably already
KVO compliant for those same properties.
So you can do things like binding
to them from the user interface.
So for example, how this works,
when you're scripting the object,
it sends setValueForKey because
the scripter ran a script like
setRadius of circle1 of frontDocument,
something like that.
So setValueForKey will call
and find your setKey method,
but then it also goes ahead and
notifies observers like bound
UI objects of that change too.
So the UI will update automatically
without you having to write
anything into your accessors.
For too many relationships,
mutable array value for key is
used by Cocoa Scripting now.
How that works is Cocoa Scripting
calls mutable array value for key,
and what's returned is actually a
collection proxy that represents
the relationship that your class
has to those other objects,
like an NS Graphics Bindings
document's relationship to circles.
So it's returned,
looks just like an NS mutable
array to the client,
Cocoa Scripting itself in this case,
and as NS mutable array API is used to
insert and remove or replace objects,
the container objects,
insert object in key to index,
and remove methods are
invoked automatically.
So the client of key-value
coding has a tremendous amount of
flexibility about what they can do.
Anything that an NS mutable array can do.
Including things added in categories.
But the owner of that relationship only
has to implement a pair of methods.
And as all this happens,
bound UI objects get
updated automatically.
I've been talking about
automatic KVO notification,
so I guess I should mention
manual KVO notification,
just so you know why we bother
to call it automatic at all,
because there's another system, too.
And they coexist very well.
You can have automatic
KVO notification turned on for class,
and then also use manual KVO notification
for more complicated situations.
Shouldn't be needed that often
for scriptable properties,
but you can use it, for example,
when your class is changing
its own IVARs directly outside
of a KVC compliance method,
like setKey.
And it's pretty easy to use.
You just do a will change value
for key before the change,
and a did change value
for key after the change.
So I'd like to leave you with
some hints about debugging
your application scriptability.
There's a lot of logging available
that Cocoa Scripting will do to help
you figure out what's going wrong.
And also, every time we touch this stuff,
we seem to add or clean up a
description method in any of
the Cocoa Scripting classes.
So logging.
Cocoa,
as we wrote in the support for SDEF,
we made sure that all the errors and
warnings that it spits out are useful.
So I'll demonstrate that in a little bit.
So mistakes that you make are
easy to pin down instead of things
just going mysteriously wrong.
And we also added this support
for warnings and errors,
improvements,
serendipitously to the old file formats,
too.
Script Suite and Script Terminology.
So when you see these, fix the warnings.
They all actually mean something.
And if it's not descriptive enough,
you know, send an email to one of
the public lists or to,
you know,
Cocoa Feedback or something like that.
You can have Cocoa log information about
every scriptable command as it happens,
just with a simple default.
Defaults write,
NS Global Domain NS Scripting
Debug Log Level 1.
And if you only want to turn
on logging for one application,
substitute NS Global Domain with the
bundle identifier for that application.
I mentioned that we added a bunch
of description methods to classes.
One of them is NSScriptSuiteRegistry,
and then all the classes
like NSClassDescription,
NSScriptCommandDescription,
things like that.
So if you want to see what
Cocoa pulled out of your SDef
file or your old ScriptSuite file,
just break the application anywhere
and type what you see here:
po nsclass from string,
NSScriptSuiteRegistry,
shared ScriptSuiteRegistry.
And it'll send a description
message to the ScriptSuiteRegistry,
and just an enormous amount of
information will be presented
to you so you can see exactly
what Cocoa thinks you said about
your application scriptability.
There are some other
description methods too,
and a script command has one.
I don't know if everybody's found it yet.
If you're in the middle of one
of your scriptability accessors,
and you're wondering why was this called,
you're watching script
editor send events,
but it's still not obvious,
then you can print a description
of the current command.
So,
and if you are an old Apple Events hand,
and you wanna see what
Apple Event resulted in the
creation of that NS script command,
you can get the Apple Event from
the current command and
print its description too.
So, demo.
[Transcript missing]
And I just, you know,
fat-fingered one of the type names here.
And caused the dictionary to be loaded,
and it now gives you a super informative
message that'll help people debug.
SDF warning for attribute
display name of class document
in suite graphics binding suite.
Strang is not a valid type name.
So we're trying to help make
it easier to debug this stuff.
So I won't leave that broken.
And just relaunch graphics binding again.
And let's look at all the
information that's available
to help you debug this stuff.
[Transcript missing]
And while I'm here,
let me show you another debugging
trick that I think you'll like.
Let me put a breakpoint on one
of our simple accessor methods.
So just set radius.
And continue that.
will be presenting his presentation.
Mark Piccirelli: Thank you, Mark.
So let me show you what
Cocoa Scripting is doing right here,
by the way.
If you follow the stack trace,
The Apple Event Manager is
getting the Apple Event,
this is Cocoa's Apple Event Manager,
making a script command out of it,
executing the script command,
and this is the set command.
It eventually boils down to a
call to the key-value coding
set value for key method.
is the director of the NMSS program,
which is smart enough to
call your set radius method.
Now this one is interesting.
If you look at this,
if you take a peek at one of
these private function names,
NS set float value and notify,
what does and notify mean?
Well, it means that there are key-value
observers registered with this
object as a result of the bindings
that are in the UI of this program,
and it's going to tell them
that the value changed,
even though this method
that does almost nothing.
So let me put a good break point
at the method that does that.
The way automatic KVO works, by the way,
is it causes invocations of "will
change value for key" and "did
change value for key" around the
invocation of your set method.
So let's put a breakpoint around on
did change value for key and continue.
Xcode wants my attention,
but I don't want to talk to it.
So set float value and notify just
finished calling your set accessor.
Now it's calling did
change value for key.
So it's going to send did change
value for key is where notifications
are sent out to any observers.
So if you've been working
with Cocoa bindings,
by the way,
you might have had some trouble
figuring out who's observing who.
Let me show you this
little trick right now.
PO self-observation info.
Observation info is
declared as a void start.
It's an opaque type.
I don't want you digging
around in there too much.
I don't want you to write dependencies
on the internal structure of that,
but it's okay to take a peek.
So here's what it outputs.
This object is one of the
circles in graphics binding,
and there's observers of
its shadow offset property,
color radius, shadow angle, X lock,
Y lock.
It's because the graphics view is
observing all this stuff so that it knows
whether or not to redraw the circle.
So great deal of
information there for you.
So that's it for demos.
So one thing we've learned over
the past year since releasing
the Cocoa Bindings functionality
is that we achieved our goals of
helping you to write not much code,
but I think we ramped up the learning
curve a little bit for Cocoa.
And a big part of that is debug ability.
And if you were at the Cocoa binding
session a couple of days ago,
we pointed you to a new default that
we're adding for binding to give you
more logging of what goes on in bindings.
We're going to be doing
more stuff like that.
We want to make it as easy as
possible for you to find your
mistakes while you're learning
to use this stuff quickly.
So you'll see more description stuff,
more logging,
special defaults that you can
turn on to do sorts of trickery,
things like that.
So before I go,
I want you to point you to
this very important document,
make sure absolutely
everybody has read it,
the scripting interface guidelines,
which are pretty new,
but they're not that new.
I think they're about
four months old now.
They're since last WWDC, though.
And I want you to read this because
consistency across apps is tremendously
important in scriptability,
just like as it is in regular
graphical user interfaces.
People want to learn stuff once
and reapply it over and over again.
Following the guidelines
helps them do that.
It makes your scriptable
application look better.
It makes other scriptable
applications look better,
too, when everybody's looking the same.
So Cocoa itself, of course,
either follows these rules scrupulously
right now or is about to follow them.
So Cocoa itself, of course,
either follows these rules scrupulously
right now or is about to follow them.
It's not that we're about to start
following these rules scrupulously,
or we might just change some
of the rules a little bit.
But in general,
what Cocoa does is going to be perfectly
consistent with what we suggest you do.
And we're making it easy for you to
follow these guidelines yourself.
And now that you know about this,
read this.
If you're about to start
work on a new application and
you haven't read this yet,
read it now because it actually has some
design advice about how you can save
yourself a little bit of work later.
And now that you know about this,
read this.
If you're about to start
work on a new application and
you haven't read this yet,
read it now because it actually has some
design advice about how you can save
yourself a little bit of work later.
So for more information,
you can go to our website and just click,
click, click away.
Or you can send an email to Matt Formica.